==== Front
Int PsychogeriatrInt PsychogeriatrIPGInternational Psychogeriatrics / Ipa1041-61021741-203XCambridge University Press Cambridge, UK 10.1017/S1041610214001963S104161021400196300196Research ArticleAgitation in cognitive disorders: International Psychogeriatric Association
provisional consensus clinical and research definition J. Cummings et al.Agitation definitionCummings Jeffrey 
1
Mintzer Jacobo 
2
Brodaty Henry 
3
Sano Mary 
4
Banerjee Sube 
5
Devanand D.P. 
6
Gauthier Serge 
7
Howard Robert 
8
Lanctôt Krista 
9
Lyketsos Constantine G. 
10
Peskind Elaine 
11
Porsteinsson Anton P. 
12
Reich Edgardo 
13
Sampaio Cristina 
14
Steffens David 
15
Wortmann Marc 
16
Zhong Kate 
17
1 Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain
Health, Las Vegas, Nevada,
USA2 Roper St. Francis Hospital,
The Clinical Biotechnology Research Institute, South
Carolina, USA3 Centre for Health Brain Ageing,
The University of New South Wales,
Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia4 Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York, USA5 Brighton and Sussex Medical School,
Trafford Centre for Medical Research, University of
Sussex, Brighton, East Sussex,
UK6 New York State Psychiatric
Institute, Riverside Drive, New
York, New York, USA7 McGill Center for Studies in Aging,
Douglas Mental Health University Institute Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada8 Institute of Psychiatry,
King's College of London, London,
UK9 Sunnybrook Research Institute,
University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada10 The Johns Hopkins Memory and Alzheimer's
Treatment Center, The Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical
Center, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA11 VA Puget Sound Health Care
System, Columbian Way, Seattle,
Washington, USA12 Monroe Community Hospital,
Rochester, New York, USA13 Department of Neuroscience,
Hospital Julio Mendez, University of Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina14 CHDI Foundation,
Princeton, New Jersey, USA15 Department of Psychiatry,
University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, Connecticut,
USA16 Alzheimer's Disease
International, London, UK17 Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain
Health, Las Vegas, Nevada,
USACorrespondence should be addressed to: Dr. Jeffrey
Cummings, MD, ScD, Cleveland
Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, 888 W Bonneville
Ave, Las Vegas, NV 89106,
USA. Phone: 702-483-6029; Fax:
702-483-6028. Email: cumminj@ccf.org.1 2015 14 10 2014 27 1 7 17 02 6 2014 12 7 2014 15 8 2014 19 8 2014 © International Psychogeriatric Association 20142014International Psychogeriatric AssociationThis is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted
re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.Background:
Agitation is common across neuropsychiatric disorders and contributes to disability,
institutionalization, and diminished quality of life for patients and their caregivers.
There is no consensus definition of agitation and no widespread agreement on what
elements should be included in the syndrome. The International Psychogeriatric
Association formed an Agitation Definition Work Group (ADWG) to develop a provisional
consensus definition of agitation in patients with cognitive disorders that can be
applied in epidemiologic, non-interventional clinical, pharmacologic, non-pharmacologic
interventional, and neurobiological studies. A consensus definition will facilitate
communication and cross-study comparison and may have regulatory applications in drug
development programs.

Methods:
The ADWG developed a transparent process using a combination of electronic,
face-to-face, and survey-based strategies to develop a consensus based on agreement of a
majority of participants. Nine-hundred twenty-eight respondents participated in the
different phases of the process.

Results:
Agitation was defined broadly as: (1) occurring in patients with a cognitive impairment
or dementia syndrome; (2) exhibiting behavior consistent with emotional distress; (3)
manifesting excessive motor activity, verbal aggression, or physical aggression; and (4)
evidencing behaviors that cause excess disability and are not solely attributable to
another disorder (psychiatric, medical, or substance-related). A majority of the
respondents rated all surveyed elements of the definition as “strongly agree” or
“somewhat agree” (68–88% across elements). A majority of the respondents agreed that the
definition is appropriate for clinical and research applications.

Conclusions:
A provisional consensus definition of agitation has been developed. This definition can
be used to advance interventional and non-interventional research of agitation in
patients with cognitive impairment.

Key words:
Alzheimer’s diseaseagitationcognitive impairmentaggressionInternational Psychogeriatric AssociationFood and Drug Administrationclinical trialsinterventionepidemiology
==== Body
Introduction
Agitation is a common clinical manifestation of many neuropsychiatric disorders. It is a
frequent manifestation of Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal dementia (FTD), dementia
with Lewy bodies (DLB), and other dementia syndromes (Ballard and Corbett, 2010; Manoochehri and Huey, 2012; Bruns and Josephs, 2013). It occurs in schizophrenia, bipolar illness, and depression (Gonzalez
et al., 2013; Swann, 2013). While agitation may include aggressive
behaviors, it is not identical to aggression, and agitation can occur without aggression
(e.g. pacing, rocking, repetitious mannerisms). Agitation can precipitate
institutionalization (Okura et al., 2011), diminishes the quality of life of patients and caregivers (Khoo et
al., 2013), and, when severe, may require
treatment with medications (Herrmann and Lanctôt, 2007). There is an emerging biology of agitation, and frontal lobe dysfunction is
implicated in both clinical and neuroimaging studies (Senanarong et al.
2004; Bruen et al., 2008). Treatment of agitation – both pharmacologic and
non-pharmacologic – is an unmet need in the care of patients with cognitive impairment
(Herrmann and Lanctôt, 2007; Gitlin et
al., 2012).

In spite of the framework of studies that have begun to increase understanding of
agitation, there is no commonly accepted consensus description of this common clinical
phenomenon (Laughren, 2001). Lay definitions of
agitation are non-specific and include states of excitement, disturbance, or worry. A
consensus definition of agitation applicable in the setting of cognitive impairment would
facilitate a wide spectrum of research, including pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic
intervention studies, epidemiologic investigations of agitation, clinical studies, and
research on the neurobiology of this behavior. A definition would also provide a common
framework for diagnostic nomenclatures such as the International Classification of Diseases
and Related Health Problems (ICD; (World Health Organization, 2014) and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM; (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). In
addition, clinically relevant definitions have important regulatory applications; when
agents possibly appropriate for the treatment of agitation are presented to the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), European Medicines Agency (EMA), or other licensing authorities,
the treatment indication must be defined using language useful to clinicians caring for
patients with the condition. Without a consensus definition, it is difficult to compare
studies or to know what range of behaviors were included in a study of “agitation.”

Rating scales such as the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (Cohen-Mansfield et
al., 1989), Neuropsychiatric Inventory
(NPI; Cummings et al., 1994), or
Behavioral Pathology in Alzheimer's Disease (BEHAVE-AD; Reisberg et al.,
1987; De Deyn and Wirshing, 2001) are often used to identify patients for clinical
trials of anti-agitation agents and to measure the clinical symptoms in other descriptive
and intervention studies. Rating scales, however, are not definitions; rather, they are
means of measuring the frequency or severity of symptoms. Most clinicians do not use rating
scales for routine care of patients. To assist in defining populations for clinical care and
research, a definition that is not dependent on a particular rating scale is needed.

The International Psychogeriatric Association (IPA) has an established leadership role in
the field of geriatric behavioral health, including agitation, and has led initiatives
involved with this topic (Finkel et al., 1996; Reisberg et al., 1997; Draper, 1999; Finkel, 2000). To advance the study of agitation by
establishing a consensus definition, the IPA formed an Agitation Definition Working Group
(ADWG) to produce a provisional consensus definition of agitation. The ADWG conducted a
broadly inclusive process, involving the IPA and its affiliate members, employing electronic
means of participant engagement, holding a face-to-face meeting with international
representation, and using survey-based methods. The ADWG was made up of the IPA leadership
and other stakeholders interested in the neuropsychiatric aspects of AD and other disorders.
The ADWG implemented a transparent process that included nearly 1,000 survey respondents and
engaged the memberships of the IPA, IPA affiliates, and other organizations involved in the
care and research of neuropsychiatric disorders in patients with cognitive impairment. Here
the process is described, the definition is presented, and the elements of the definition
are discussed.

Methods
Consensus-building process
Initial formulation
The literature was reviewed (by Jeffrey Cummings), past definitions of agitation
identified, and common elements of the definitions reviewed. A preliminary survey of
these definitions and elements to be considered for inclusion was developed and
presented to the IPA leadership.

Survey 1
The ADWG was formed to guide this project. The ADWG reviewed the proposed survey,
adding or deleting elements to enhance the focus and clarity of the questions. The
revised survey was sent electronically to the IPA membership and affiliate members
(organizations that share the mission of advancing clinical practice, research, and
education to improve the mental health of the elderly). The survey collected demographic
information on the respondents, determined the preferences among five definitions of
agitation used in the literature (Kong, 2005),
asked if the definition should be limited to cognitive impairment syndromes, established
key behavioral elements to be included in a definition, and interrogated whether the
respondents considered agitation and anxiety to be the same and whether agitation and
aggression are the same.

International expert consensus meeting
Following completion and analysis of the first survey, an international expert
consensus meeting was held to develop a draft definition based on a review of the
literature and information derived from the survey. The members of the ADWG present at
the meeting include the authors of this paper. In this meeting a draft definition was
developed that represented a consensus of those present. Following the expert meeting, a
preliminary draft of the definition was developed and circulated to all members of the
ADWG. Through multiple electronic exchanges a final consensus was reached (Table 1). Not all aspects of the consensus
definition were unanimously endorsed by all participants but a majority of stakeholders
agreed on the elements. Table 1. Consensus provisional definition of agitation in cognitive disorders

A. The patient meets criteria for a cognitive
impairment or dementia syndrome (e.g. AD, FTD, DLB, vascular dementia, other
dementia, a pre-dementia cognitive impairment syndrome such as mild
cognitive impairment or other cognitive disorder).		
B. The patient exhibits at least one of the
following behaviors that are associated with observed or inferred evidence
of emotional distress (e.g. rapid changes in mood, irritability, outbursts).
The behavior has been persistent or frequently recurrent for a minimum of
two weeks’ and represents a change from the patient's usual behavior.		
(a) Excessive motor activity (examples include:
pacing, rocking, gesturing, pointing fingers, restlessness, performing
repetitious mannerisms).		
(b) Verbal aggression (e.g. yelling, speaking in
an excessively loud voice, using profanity, screaming, shouting).		
(c) Physical aggression (e.g. grabbing, shoving,
pushing, resisting, hitting others, kicking objects or people, scratching,
biting, throwing objects, hitting self, slamming doors, tearing things, and
destroying property).		
C. Behaviors are severe enough to produce excess
disability, which in the clinician's opinion is beyond that due to the
cognitive impairment and including at least one of the following:		
(a) Significant impairment in interpersonal
relationships.		
(b) Significant impairment in other aspects of
social functioning.		
(c) Significant impairment in ability to perform
or participate in daily living activities.		
D. While co-morbid conditions may be present, the
agitation is not attributable solely to another psychiatric disorder,
suboptimal care conditions, medical condition, or the physiological effects
of a substance.		


To develop further consensus beyond the ADWG, other key stakeholder groups received the
provisional definition for comments, including the members of the Neuropsychiatric
Syndrome Professional Interest Area of ISTAART (Geda et al., 2013) comprising thought leaders in the area of
neuropsychiatric aspects of AD.

Survey 2
Once an expert consensus from the ADWG was achieved, the IPA and affiliate members were
re-contacted to provide additional input into the definition and its acceptability for
clinical and research studies, including prospective validation investigations. Six
thousand emails were sent; there were 350 respondents (7%) in this phase of the
consensus development process.

Report preparation
Once the second survey was complete, this report containing a description of the
consensus process, the definition, and the elements of the definition was prepared
(Jeffrey Cummings) and circulated among the ADWG members. Agreement was reached on the
text describing the provisional definition and the manuscript was submitted to
International Psychogeriatrics for review.

Results
Survey 1
Six thousand emails were sent; 557 individuals responded. The response rate from IPA
members was 30.1%. Many members of the IPA and affiliate organizations are involved
predominantly with mood disorders, psychosis, or other non-dementia aspects of geriatric
psychiatry. Of the 557 respondents, 382 were physicians, including 292 psychiatrists.
Other professional disciplines providing responses included nurses (57), psychologists
(50), occupational therapists (13), social workers (14), and others/no responses (41).
Three hundred eighty-eight (70%) of the respondents had been in practice for more than ten
years.

This initial survey provided valuable insights from those involved in the care of
agitated patients, and key elements of the definition were identified. Table 2 shows the responses to five existing
definitions of agitation (Kong, 2005). Three of
the definitions had relatively high acceptability (22–34% rating as the “best
definition”). Table 2. Five proposed definitions of agitation in dementia and the number of respondents
who ranked each of them as the best or the second-best definition


definition
	
percentage of respondents who ranked the definition as the best
	
percentage of respondents who ranked the definition as the second
best
	
The patient has periods when he refuses to
cooperate, won't let people help, or is hard to handle.	4	4	
Excessive motor activity associated with a feeling
of inner tension. The activity is usually non-productive and repetitious and
consists of such behavior as inability to sit still, pacing, wringing of
hands, and pulling at clothes.	31	19	
Inappropriate verbal, vocal, or motor activity that
is not explained by needs or confusion per se. It includes
behaviors such as aimless wandering, pacing, cursing, screaming, biting, and
fighting.	22	38	
Vocal or motor behavior that is either disruptive,
unsafe, or interferes with the delivery of care in a particular environment.
It included four behavioral areas such as vocalization, motor disturbances,
aggressiveness, and resisting care.	34	26	
Those observed patient behaviors that communicate to
others that the patient is experiencing an unpleasant state of excitement and
which remain after interventions to reduce internal or external stimuli by
managing resistiveness, alleviating aversive physical signs, and decreasing
sources of accumulated stress have been carried out.	9	12	


The ADWG surveyed essential elements of the definition of agitation. The percentage of
respondents identifying specific adjectives as key behavioral elements of the definition
included: excessive (71%), inappropriate (54%), repetitive (46%), observable (64%),
dangerous (24%), and disruptive (56%) (Table
3). Table 3. Proposed elements of a definition of agitation and the percentage of respondents
endorsing that item as an essential element of a definition of agitation


element
	
percentage of respondents endorsing the elements as a key component of a
definition of agitation
	
Excessive	71	
Inappropriate	54	
Repetitive	46	
Observable	64	
Dangerous	24	
Disruptive	56	


Of the items listed as possible behaviors to be included in a definition of agitation,
the following were endorsed by at least 50% of the respondents: pacing, aimless wandering,
verbal aggression, constant unwarranted requests for attention or help, hitting others,
hitting self, pushing people, throwing things, general restlessness, screaming,
resistiveness, hurting self, hurting others, tearing things or destroying property,
shouting, and kicking furniture (Table 4). This
information guided the elements included in the definition by the ADWG. Table 4. Behaviors that survey respondents indicated should be included in a definition of
agitation


item
	
percentage of respondents who thought the item belonged to the definition
of agitation
	
Pacing	68	
Aimless wandering	52	
Spitting at meals	29	
Spitting at people	40	
Cursing	42	
Verbal aggression	71	
Constant unwarranted requests for attention or help	53	
Repetitive questions	35	
Repetitive sentences	31	
Hitting others	58	
Hitting self	57	
Grabbing people	48	
Pushing people	54	
Throwing things	56	
General restlessness	80	
Screaming	63	
Biting	49	
Scratching	48	
Trying to get to a different place (e.g. out of the
room or building)	48	
Intentional falling	16	
Complaining	20	
Negativism	21	
Resistiveness	54	
Eating/drinking inappropriate substances	15	
Hurting self	54	
Hurting others	53	
Handling things inappropriately	26	
Hiding things	11	
Hoarding things	12	
Tearing things or destroying property	62	
Performing repetitious mannerisms	45	
Making verbal sexual advances	23	
Making physical sexual advances	24	
Making strange noises (weird laugher or crying)	38	
Stubbornness	17	
Shouting	62	
Slamming doors intentionally	46	
Kicking furniture	52	


When queried as to whether agitation and anxiety were the same, overlapping, or distinct
concepts, most of the respondents found them to be overlapping (0.3%, 61%, and 37%
respectively). When asked whether agitation and aggression are the same, overlapping, or
distinct, 0.8%, 66%, and 32% endorsed each option.

Survey 2
Table 5 lists the questions of the survey
regarding the definition developed by the ADWG and the responses of the participants. All
elements of the definition surveyed were rated as “strongly agree” or “somewhat agree” by
a majority of the respondents (ranging from 68.2% for “the exclusion criterion is clear”
to 88.8% for “the physical aggression components are captured appropriately in the
definition”). A majority agreed (strongly or somewhat) that the definition is appropriate
for research application. For non-interventional descriptive clinical research, 44%
strongly agreed and 33.7% somewhat agreed with the appropriateness of the definition
(77.7% agreed); for pharmacologic interventional clinical research, 43.7% strongly agreed
and 31.7% somewhat agreed (75.4% agreed); and for clinical trials 39.2% and 36% agreed
strongly and somewhat respectively (75.2% agreed). Table 5. Questions of survey 2 exploring the acceptability of the draft definition and the
percentage of participants who responded as strongly agree or somewhat agree


survey question
	
percentage of respondents who strongly agree
	
percentage of respondents who somewhat agree
	
The definition captures what I mean when I use the
term “agitation” to describe one of my patients.	50.8	35.1	
The inclusion criteria – A, B, C – are sufficiently
clear for clinical application.	51.7	31.7	
The inclusion criteria – A, B, C – are sufficiently
clear for research application.	35.7	37.7	
The exclusion criterion – D – is sufficiently clear
for clinical application.	38.5	36.8	
The exclusion criterion – D – is sufficiently clear
for research application.	26.0	42.2	
The subjective aspects of the syndrome are captured
appropriately – observed or inferred evidence of emotional distress (e.g.
rapid changes in mood, irritability, outbursts). The behavior has been
sustained or persistent for a minimum of two weeks in duration and represents
a change from the person's usual behavior.	42.8	35.4	
The physical aggression aspects of the syndrome are
captured appropriately – grabbing, shoving, pushing, resisting, hitting
others, kicking objects or people, scratching, biting, throwing objects,
hitting self, slamming doors, tearing things, and destroying property.	65.7	23.1	
The verbal aspects of the syndrome are captured
appropriately – yelling, speaking in an excessively loud voice, using
profanity, screaming, shouting.	59.7	28.2	
The definition is appropriate as a means of
identifying patients for non-interventional descriptive clinical research.	44.0	33.7	
The definition is appropriate as a means of
identifying patients for non-pharmacologic interventional clinical research.	43.7	31.7	
The definition is appropriate as a means of
identifying patients for clinical trials.	36.2	36	
The definition is appropriate as a foundation for
validation studies of its sensitivity and specificity.	39.4	36.2	


When queried whether the definition should be limited to cognitive impairment syndromes –
the approach taken by the ADWG – 67.4% said “yes.”

Discussion
Elements of the consensus definition
The provisional consensus definition uses the DSM style for defining a disorder as one
that produces disability (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). The definition is limited to patients with cognitive
impairment, requires evidence of emotional distress, requires one of the three observable
types of behavior (excessive motor activity, verbal aggression, or physical aggression),
specifies that the behavior causes excess disability, and notes that the behaviors cannot
be solely attributable to a suboptimal care environment or another disorder such as
psychiatric illness, medical illness, or effects of a substance.

Provisional consensus definition
The definition is labeled as “provisional” because it may evolve as it is subjected to
prospective validation. It represents an important starting point in a dynamic dialogue
that will evolve with clinical application, research, and review. Validation studies are
expected to show that some elements are better suited to clinical and research
applications than others.

The definition was labeled as a “consensus” because a majority of stakeholders involved
in the process concurred with the current definition. Not all elements were unanimously
endorsed; a consensus was achieved on all aspects of the definition.

Limitation to syndromes with cognitive impairment
Agitation occurs in many disorders and is not limited to conditions with cognitive
impairment (Ballard and Corbett, 2010;
Manoochehri and Huey, 2012; Bruns and Josephs,
2013; Gonzalez et al.,
2013; Swann, 2013). The ADWG and the participating members of the surveys
favored limiting the definition to disorders with cognitive impairment. Sixty-seven
percent of Survey 2 respondents agreed with this approach.

There are currently separate definitions for psychosis of AD and psychosis in
schizophrenia even though they have shared elements such as delusions and hallucinations
(Jeste and Finkel, 2000); similarly there are
definitions of major depression and depression in AD that are overlapping but not
identical (Olin et al., 2003). Similar considerations may apply to agitation, and we chose to develop a
definition explicitly for patients with cognitive impairment. Further research may lead
to modifications of this approach.

The FDA has expressed concern about “pseudo-specificity” of syndromes that are
artificially assigned to one disorder when they represent general syndromes for which
drugs are already approved (Cummings and Jeste, 2007), and the ADWG wished to avoid constructing a definition that might raise
this issue. Our definition applies specifically to the type of agitation observed in
patients with cognitive impairment based on the unique relationships of agitation with
aspects of cognition (Senanarong et al., 2004); a distinct pathophysiology (Bruen et al.,
2008; Trzepacz et al.,
2013); and possibly a differential response
to treatment compared with syndromes such as psychosis of AD (Schneider et
al., 2006).

Subjective aspect
The definition requires that there be observed or inferred evidence of emotional
distress. Examples of behaviors indicative of emotional distress are provided, including
rapid changes in mood, irritability, or emotional outbursts. The ADWG required this
subjective element because agitation as conceived by the panel includes the concept that
the patient is upset or distressed, and the agitated behavior is an expression of this
emotional state. A person could exhibit purposeful aggression with behaviors overlapping
with the definition but would not be classified as “agitated” if there was no associated
distress. It is also important that patients not be treated when their behavior is
upsetting to someone else (a family member or caregiver) but not to the patient.
Requiring the subjective element of the definition makes this less likely. It is not
possible to directly observe emotional states, and they must be inferred from observable
behaviors. In all, 78.2% of the Survey 2 respondents strongly (42.8%) or somewhat
(35.4%) agreed that this aspect of agitation was captured appropriately by the proposed
definition.

Sustained
A single episode or short-lived period of behavioral change would not meet the
definition for agitation developed by the ADWG. The definition applies to a chronic or
at least long-lasting state that has been sustained, persisted, or been frequently
recurrent for at least two weeks. This aspect of the definition will assist with
intervention studies (pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic) where interventional groups
are compared and sustained behavioral changes are required to see a difference in the
study outcomes.

Change from previous behavior
The ADWG limited the definition of agitation to patients with cognitive impairment.
Behaviors that preceded the onset of the associated cognitive disorder would not be
included in this definition. This aspect of the consensus definition is similar to the
precedent adapted in the definition of psychosis of AD (Jeste and Finkel, 2000).

Observable behaviors
The patient must have at least one type of observable agitated behavior. The behaviors
can include excessive motor activity (such as pacing, rocking,
gesturing, pointing fingers, restlessness, performing repetitious mannerisms),
verbal aggression (e.g. yelling, speaking in an excessively loud
voice, using profanity, screaming, shouting), or physical aggression
(e.g. grabbing, shoving, pushing, resisting, hitting others, kicking objects or people,
scratching, biting, throwing objects, hitting self, slamming doors, tearing things, and
destroying property). These behaviors are the core aspects of the agitation syndrome;
they reflect the behaviors endorsed in Survey 1 as comprising agitation. The ADWG
recognized that agitated patients exhibit different repertoires of behaviors and that,
in the presence of emotional distress, any of the behaviors described would fulfill this
criterion of the definition. Clinician judgment is not prohibited by the definition and
behaviors other than those listed may be present in agitated patients. In all, 88.8% of
the Survey 2 respondents strongly (65.7%) or somewhat (23.1%) agreed that the proposed
definition appropriately captured the physical aggression aspects of agitation, and
87.9% strongly (59.7%) or somewhat (28.2%) agreed regarding the verbal aspects of
agitation.

Excess disability
A disorder is defined as producing disability (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), and the ADWG incorporated this aspect of
the definition as a measure of the clinical meaningfulness of the behavior. If the
behavior produces no disability for the individual in terms of interpersonal
relationships, social function, or impact on daily living activities, then it would not
meet this criterion of the definition. The disability must be more than can be
attributed solely to the cognitive impairment syndrome. Clinician judgment will be
required to make this determination.

Necessary exclusions
Agitation has many possible causes and is seen across a broad range of neuropsychiatric
illnesses (Ballard and Corbett, 2010;
Manoochehri and Huey, 2012; Bruns and Josephs,
2013; Gonzalez et al.,
2013; Swann, 2013). The definition proffered by the ADWG requires the presence
of an underlying cognitive impairment syndrome such as AD, FTD, DLB, or a prodromal
dementia state. In some cases, patients with these disorders may have other psychiatric
illness, medical illness, use substances, or be in suboptimal care environments that can
cause agitated behaviors. The ADWG definition requires that the agitation not be
attributable solely to one of these co-existing conditions. Clinician judgment may be
required to make this determination. The exclusion aspects of the definition had some of
the lowest endorsements on Survey 2 as 38.5% strongly agreed and 36.8% somewhat agreed
that the exclusions were adequate for clinical application; 26% strongly agreed and
42.2% somewhat agreed that the exclusions were adequate for research application.

Comment on the definition
The ADWG definition of agitation with cognitive impairment is broad and assumes that
agitation is a syndrome and not a response to another disorder. An alternative approach is
to define an “agitation with psychosis,” “agitation with depression,” etc. An extensive
literature establishes that agitation can be seen in the absence of concomitant
psychopathology; neuroimaging studies suggest unique regional dysfunction that is distinct
from other disorders (Bruen et al., 2008; Trzepacz et al., 2013); and clinical trials demonstrate that the pharmacologic response of
agitation may differ from that of other types of behavioral disturbances (Schneider
et al., 2006). Therapies have
been approved for agitation in multiple psychiatric settings (e.g. aripiprazole for acute
treatment of agitation with schizophrenia or bipolar I disorder), setting a precedent for
viewing agitation as a distinct syndrome. While no drug has been approved for agitation
per se (i.e. without aggression, depression, or psychosis), several
psychosocial interventions have shown benefit in reducing agitated behavior (Low
et al., 2013). The ADWG
favored defining agitation as a distinct clinically identifiable syndrome.

Using a syndromal definition of clinical phenomena within neurologic disorders has a
precedent in the identification of pseudo-bulbar affect (PBA) and the approval of
dextromethorphan/quinidine for PBA across neurologic disorders after having demonstrated
efficacy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and multiple sclerosis. A similar strategy of
showing efficacy for anti-agitation agents across several disorders could be adopted in
anti-agitation drug development programs.

The relationship of agitation to aggression sparked discussion. These are overlapping but
not identical concepts (Cohen-Mansfield and Mintzer, 2005). Agitation can occur in the absence of aggression, and predatory
aggression can occur without agitation; it is unlikely that aggression occurs without
agitation in the cognitive impairment syndromes described by the ADWG. Sixty-six percent
of the survey respondents consider agitation and aggression as overlapping concepts; 32%
consider them to be distinct. Aggression may be a more severe form of agitation or it may
occur in differing biological or psychological circumstances. The comparative response
profiles to pharmacologic or non-pharmacologic interventions of agitation with and without
aggression have not been comprehensively explicated. There is currently insufficient
evidence to conclude that agents or interventions used for aggressive agitation would
necessarily work or be warranted in non-aggressive agitation. The ADWG definition
criterion B allows both agitation without aggression (excessive motor activity) and with
aggression (verbal aggression and physical aggression). Investigators using this
definition of agitation should note which elements of criterion B were met (e.g. excessive
motor activity, verbal aggression, or physical aggression). Longitudinal comparison of
studies will help define the relationship between agitation and aggression, and the ADWG
definition will advance understanding of this aspect of agitation.

This definition will be useful in the study of psychosocial interventions and in clinical
trials of anti-agitation agents. The absence of a consensus definition may have
contributed to the lack of activity in developing new therapies for agitation with
cognitive impairment; no agent has been approved for treatment of this syndrome in spite
of extensive documentation of the disability associated with agitation. Study entry would
require that the participants have agitation as defined by the ADWG. A minimum baseline
severity level on an agitation scale would typically be required. An outcome measure –
usually an agitation measure different from the one used to define entry severity – would
be used to compare baseline with end-of-study scores for the active treatment and the
placebo (or active comparator) control group. It may be useful to control for other
behavioral features such as mood changes or psychosis. The ADWG definition could play a
critical role in defining the patient population for such trials.

The development of a provisional definition of agitation is the first step in advancing a
research agenda for the definition. Validity studies using other agitation assessments,
reliability of the application of the definition, usefulness in clinical trials,
usefulness in non-pharmacologic research, and real-world application in clinical and
healthcare settings will lead to refinements and adjustments that will enhance the
definition and advance the study of neuropsychiatric syndromes in cognitive impairment
disorders.

Conflict of interest declaration
The sponsors, Otsuka and Avanir Pharmaceutricals, gave unrestricted education grants to
help support the international meeting that was part of the definition-building process.

Dr. Jeffrey Cummings has provided consultation to Acadia, ADAMAS, Anavex, Avanir,
Boehinger-Ingelheim, Eisai, EnVivo, GE Healthcare, Genentech, Lilly, Lundbeck, Medavante,
Merck, Novartis, Otsuka, Pfizer, Prana, QR Pharma, Resverlogix, Roche, Sonexa, Suven,
Takeda, and Toyoma companies. Dr. Cummings owns the copyright of the Neuropsychiatric
Inventory.

Professor Sube Banerjee has received consultancy fees, honoraria for speaking, and support
in attending conferences from the makers of anti-dementia medication and other
psychotropics, including Abbvie, Eisai, Pfizer, Novartis, Lilly, and Shire.

Professor Henry Brodaty has served as investigator for Janssen, Lilly, Medivation, Merck,
Sanofi, Servier, and Tau Therapeutics, and has been on the advisory boards of Pfizer,
Novartis, Janssen, Lundbeck, and Nutricia. Dr. Brodaty has provided consultation to Baxter,
Lilly, Merck, and Nutricia.

D.P. Devanand has received research support from Eli Lilly, and has provided consultation
to AbbVie.

Dr. Serge Gauthier has been on the scientific advisory board or investigator with Abbvie,
Affiris, Eisai, Lilly, Navidea, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi-Synthelabo, Servier, and TauRx.

Professor Robert Howard reports that he has no relevant disclosures to make.

Dr. Krista Lanctôt has had research support and/or speaker's honoraria from Abbvie Canada,
Lundbeck Canada Inc., Pfizer Canada Inc., Janssen Ortho, and Rocheand Wyeth.

Dr. Constantine Lyketsos has received grant support (research or CME) from Associated
Jewish Federation of Baltimore, Weinberg Foundation, Forest, GlaxoSmithKline, Eisai, Pfizer,
Astra-Zeneca, Lilly, Ortho-McNeil, Bristol-Myers, Novartis, National Football League, Elan,
and Functional Neuromodulation. Dr. Lyketsos has been a consultant or advisor to
Astra-Zeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Eisai, Novartis, Forest, Supernus, Adlyfe, Takeda, Wyeth,
Lundbeck, Merz, Lilly, Pfizer, Genentech, Elan, NFL Players Association, NFL Benefits
Office, Avanir, Zinfandel, BMS, Abvie, Janssen, and Orion. Honorarium or travel support has
been received from Pfizer, Forest, GlaxoSmithKline, and Health Monitor.

Dr. Jacobo Mintzer reports receipt of grants to his institution from Takeda Global Research
and Development Center, Pfizer, Genentech, Merck, Accera, Elan, Avanir, F. Hoffmann-La
Roche, Novartis, Baxter, Eli Lilly, Wyeth, and Janssen Alzheimer Initiative; and employment
with NeuroQuest, and BioPharma Connex.

Dr. Elaine Peskind has been on the speakers’ bureau for Forest Pharmaceuticals and on the
Advisory Committee for Avanir. Dr. Peskind served on the Adjudication Committee for Takeda
Pharmaceuticals.

Dr. Anton Porsteinsson has received a grant for his institution from Avanir, Eisai, Elan,
Genentech/Roche, Janssen Alzheimer Initiative, Merck, Pfizer, and Toyama. He has provided
consultation for Elan, Janssen Alzheimer Initiative, and TransTech Pharma. Dr. Porsteinsson
has membership on data safety and monitoring boards for Quintiles.

Dr. Edgardo Reich has participated as investigator in different pharmaceutical-sponsored
trials for Ely Lilly, Glaxo, Forest, Mertz. Astra Zeneca, Novartis, Roche, and Janssen. He
has received travel grants from Bayer, MerckSerono, Novartis, Mertz, and Teva.

Dr. Cristina Sampaio has been a consultant for Abbvie, Alkermes, AstraZeneca, Avanir,
Biogen, BMS, Chelsea, Genzyme, Lilly, Lundbeck, Otsuka, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi, Servier,
Takeda, and Teva.

Dr. Mary Sano has been on the Scientific Advisory Board for Medication and as a consultant
for Bayer Schering Pharma, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Elan, Genentech, Medivation, Medpace,
Pfizer, Janssen, Takeda, and United Biosource.

Dr. David Steffens is supported through grants from the National Institute of Mental
Health, and he receives textbook royalties from the American Psychiatric Press.

Dr. Marc Wortmann reports no other salaries than from Alzheimer's Disease International.

Dr. Kate Zhong has provided consultation to Avanir, Pfizer, Janssen, and Wyeth
Pharmaceuticals.

Description of authors’ roles
J. Cummings, J. Mintzer, H. Brodaty, and M. Sano formulated the research questions,
designed the study, carried out the study, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper.

S. Banerjee, D. Devanand, S. Gauthier, R. Howard, K. Lanctôt, C. Lyketsos, E. Peskind, A.
Porsteinsson, E. Reich, C. Sampaio, D. Steffens, M. Wortmann, and K. Zhong carried out the
study, analyzed the data, and wrote the article.

Acknowledgments
Two industry stakeholders provided unrestricted educational grants to help support the
consensus development process. They did not influence the work plan, study implementation,
data collection, data interpretation, or drafting of the manuscript.